...the oriented support mechanism for
oceanography. This is ONR now? Yes, sir. It was the
university support for oceanography. Still is
the major one, except for ship support through
NSF. But then they provided ship time, they
provided research time. No, it was not mission
oriented. And it really It was knowingly that way.
It got support from the admiral. Because the
admiral saw, for example, let me tell you a little
story. When sonar came out,
they ran into immediate problems in submarine use
of sonar on the continental shelf. And they didn't
know what the dickens it was. It was like a frying
pan. just crackle, crackle, crackle. And it was
destroying the effectiveness of it. And they
didn't know what it was. And they put Martin
Johnson on it from Scripps, the guy that I've
worked with. But that was before I worked with him.
That was during 1940, 41. And he found out it was a
snapping shrimp. And he found out about the
rhythm, their habits, He told them where they
might expect them and what would set them off and so
on. So some of the admirals knew that this kind of
basic research was extremely important to them.
And so at the time, and with the cajoling of Roger
and perhaps other people that I am unaware of, not
to give him full credit,
decided we don't know where an important finding
is going to come from. And so this was very
definitely not a mission-oriented group. Do you
feel that ideally that the major funds for general
scientific research in the sea should come from a
military affiliated organization such as that,
or should it be a separate Well, let me tell you
this. I don't know that that part is the important
thing. Here was what was important about ONR and
may still be. That is that they had a group of
competent people who could judge whether or not
work that was being done was good work of its kind or
not. If they could put together this small team of
people who had the executive and administrative
ability and the financial ability, they could put
together a research program which made sense,
which was coherent. This is more difficult when
you go to an institution such as NSF, where you've
got a physical oceanography program, you see, and
you had a biological and a chemical. There is no
doubt that NSF has supported some of the best
oceanographic work ever done, but not in the way
ONR could do it. They couldn't put together a
package without making that a big thing. And
that's what I think destroyed some of the work in
oceanography is that everything went to big
operations, big cooperative ventures. Now, some
of this is necessary for synopticity and physical
oceanography. It's necessary to have several
vessels and bring satellites and the whole bit
into it. But it is not for others. It is having
people that you know are working on this facet. And
this team had an overview so they could put
together this one working on this facet. And they
came up with a coherent program, which I think was
good. Now, it's still being done, I suppose. But
NSF didn't ever develop that capacity. Theirs was
wholly a peer group analysis and evaluation.
Whereas there was practically no peer group in ONR
unless they wanted to have that kind of
evaluation. They could fall back on it. But they
had the ability to go out and say, you are doing good
work. We like what you're doing. We want to give you
support, like that. Give us a proposal. NSF can't
do that,
at least It hasn't. They can't do that or they don't
do that? Well, they may do it. They may do it, but
pretty much they don't dare go around their
panels, their evaluation panels. If they do,
they're going to get in trouble. Don't you think
that's true of all federally? NAW, National
Endowment for the Humanities, or any of these,
we're pretty well rigidly controlled by our
referees on the panels themselves. Yes, there's
been a lot of buddy system in it, too. And this has
been one of the problems, is that it was very
difficult for people at one point to break into the
circle. Fortunately, you see, in 1960, Texas A&M
was getting practically nothing out of NSA. But in
1976, they're getting a lot out of Minnesota. And
part of the reason for that is that people
transferred from one institution here to another
and brought this kind of aura with them. And it's
made a difference. I'd like to ask another
question on that line. We have noticed that in
people who've joined the A&M faculty, that is
yourself, Captain Treadwell, Professor Geyer
seemed to have come with contacts in ONR, in NSL, in
private enterprise, so that they could bring with
them grants. Do you think that's a deliberate
hiring policy?
It was at first, clearly was, and still is in most
institutions.
I got associated with ONR And as a consequence, I
never ask NSF for anything other than a few hundred
dollars once to support a student on a very special
sort of thing.
When this book is finished, I'm going to write them
my first proposal for research in the deep sea. And
I'm still going to finish it. I've been invited by
several people there to come back and discuss
ideas with them, which I suppose would lead to
proposals. But I just didn't need the support. ONR
was giving me all I could use effectively. And now
we're getting off on these Mickey Mouse things
with the Bureau of Land Management, which I'm not
too keen
on. It's pretty short, fused.
telescopic vision kind of work. Are you speaking
of the work in lignite? No, this is Bureau of Land
Management work on the Outer Continental Shelf, a
preparatory to drilling for oil. I just happen to
have a few questions I wanted to ask you about that
while we're here. What do you consider, work on the
Continental Shelf, what do you consider the role
that private enterprise ought to have to play in
the financing of oceanography's activity
vis-a-vis the bureau of land management well in a
way they're doing it but it's indirect right now
they're supporting most of it the way they're
supporting it is by buying these lease rights on
the outer continental shelf from the bureau of
land management to the tune of one on Destin Dome
was $212 million, and they got no oil out of it.
So in actual fact, the oil companies are now
supporting an immense amount of research through
this indirect means. I therefore feel that mines
better than mine should decide whether they
should do more direct support.
Theirs is very definitely mission-oriented
work. For example, the state of California is now
imposing additional restrictions on them. Prior
to drilling, they must do certain kinds of
environmental studies, even though baseline
studies have been done previously. Do you
consider this good? No, I don't. I think that if we
carry this too far, it will destroy the
environmental programs. And the pendulum swings
no matter what you try to do, and it's gone much too
far, in my opinion, of stringency on
environmental concerns. Do you agree with
Spilhaus that the sea belongs to all countries
equally, that is, opposed to the concept of a
200-mile line? I assume that to me.
That question is one that I can't answer off the
cuff, and I have not really thought about it. Okay,
well... Philosophically, one would have to
answer in the affirmative, but I think there are
many other factors that have to be considered on
that. Would you like to comment on that in, let's
say, in light of the continental shells and your
work there? Well, I'll tell you. I'm not sure that
the continental shelf is the only place we're ever
going to get anything of value out of the ocean. But
obviously, it's the easier part to work on right at
the moment. So it is the place that's getting all
the attention. I don't know whether you know, but
Professor Darnell and I have cooked up a symposium
on the ecology and management of the continental
shelf. Have you learned about that? Well, at any
rate, we've got that cooking. And in it, I have just
invited, as a member of a panel, the legal counsel
for all of the oil industry working on the
Continental Shelf from Alaska to Maine. I just
carried on a long conversation with him in New
Orleans over the phone on where the environmental
movement is going vis-a-vis the oil industry. And
he should provide some interesting material on
that come this symposium in May, June. I also have,
well, Darnell and I, but these happen to be people
I've invited, the senior scientist of USGS who has
strong ideas about the environmental movement in
oil, and we're going to have a gay time over there
with these guys roaring around at each other. So
I've given a good deal of thought The thing that I am
sorry about is that we are not able to capitalize on
the funds available through, for example, the
Bureau of Land Management
for gaining the kind of information that I spoke
about earlier required for effective management
of the shelf. We are still going out with short fuse
work And by that I mean you're given the grant today
and you've got to start working tomorrow. And it is
a contract work. It is not grant work, which means
that if they tell you to collect 20 samples, you've
got to collect 20 samples or you're in trouble with
the contract. This is not the way to take advantage
of this excellent opportunity to do very good work
on the commercial. There is a study coming down the
pike that someone is going to get, I don't know who,
studying the Chenier Plain between Vermilion Bay
and Galveston Bay from the plus five contour to the
minus 100 foot contour, or isobat, in an attempt to
understand the total interplay between the ocean
and the marsh and the inner ecological affecting
areas. And this is a 26-month study in the initial
part. And it is amply funded and will provide for
the interaction of physical scientists,
biological scientists, social scientists,
including economists, sociologists. This is the
kind of thing. that I think will lead to effective
utilization and management of this
multi-purpose area we've got. And what a nice area
to do it in, this relatively untouched area. Very
few people have been to the coast between Bolivar
and the Birmingham Bay. What institutions are
competing for that?
I think there's only one academic institution and
two engineering consortia. I think LSU, there
were 22, and it's been eliminated down now to three
left, and two engineering firms. And I'm a
consultant to one of them, or to be, if they get it.
That's not Tereco, is it? No. No, it's not. But I am a
consultant to a Canadian firm and a... an eastern
firm. And they both have asked me if I would help
them if they get it. Would you describe and tell me
what TerraEco is? TerraEco? Well, that's a
low-profile avenue for me to consult when I feel
like doing it now and then. But primarily, I'm
hoping to build this to a retirement point where I
can do the kind of research I think ought to be done
and fund it myself.
I've been asked to consult and I've turned down
most of it. And right now I'm just turning in a
permission to consult for a group. I suppose I've
been asked for maybe $500,000 worth of consulting
that I could have done in the last three or four
years. Mostly I turned all of this over to two of my
former students who are now working in Taraco,
plus some other people that associate now and
then. It was an attempt primarily, originally, to
develop a tract of land so that people could live on
it somewhat more effectively than A track
developer generally develops land. Well, that
got to be kind of a burden. And so when I got calls to
appear in public, and it didn't look like it was
very appropriate to represent the university, I
thought, why don't I do that through Taraco? So I
did some in 73, 74, and some in 75. And we got some
grants now and then that people don't want the
university involved in. Now, I might run that
through Taraco if, by any chance, these other
people got this Chenier plane thing. They didn't
invite the universities for the most part. They
invited LSU, I think, as about the only
university. This was US Fish and Wildlife Service
that came up with it. But I've had very pleasant
experiences with that. But we can't
advertise. We're not trying to make much out of it.
Those things where they come to us directly and
ask. As this group in St. Croix called me and said,
would you appear for us in court? We're being sued
as a class suit against this oil spill problem that
occurred in 1971. And,
well, I cannot represent the university. So the
affiliation I will give to get around that is I'm
affiliated with TerraCo. even though I got
permission from the university to do it. Makes it a
little easier that way. It
is a consulting firm of low key, low stature.
Anything that I invent, for the most part, I would
probably run through there. I've invented a
couple of things. I've got a device which I call the
Biotal Ocean Monitor. before pollution studies
in the ocean are chronic type. And I'm running that
through Terrico. I don't think it belongs in the
University of Franklin. And I don't have any
retirement at the University particularly, so
I'm just sort of building up toward my retirement.
Do you think in these kinds of studies that there's
a conflict between private enterprise and
universities? I don't mean Terrico. I mean work
that will involve private enterprise and the
university and the study, for example, of the
marshlands on the Texas coast that you're talking
about. Yes, I do feel that the university is doing
too many things now that they should not be doing.
And Jack Williams and John Calhoun
notwithstanding, I think that, let me cite this as
an example.
Routine things that are done by the university
ought better to be done by industry, by private
enterprise. They are jamming the research
capacity of the chemistry department. Not to
speak about somebody else's department, but they
are jamming with requests or actual work being
done. Simple routine analyses for hydrocarbons
in the environment. Now what value is this to a
research-oriented institution? Unless you can
make some use of it. The university should never
get, if it's a state university in my opinion, in
crossfire between the federal government and the
state, where it has from time to time taken a
research, so-called research activity, and they
have got into a framework where the state has a
vested interest and so has the federal
government. It is a state institution receiving
federal support as well. And they come out. And if
they rule, they go one way or the other. And they're
going to make an enemy on one side or the other. And I
think the university should be out of that. I think
that the university in the main, things done by
consulting firms today should not be approached
by the university. They are destroying their
opportunities to do the esoteric kind of thing
that we don't know where it leads now. Are you
referring then specifically to the extension
services that are open? No, not alone to that. No,
not alone. That may be, in agriculture, may be a
necessary service to be performed. Maybe there
aren't private groups that do that so much. But
certainly, I'm talking about Some of the work we do
in oceanography, for example, just plain routine
stuff, going back time after time, taking grain
size analysis samples or certain biological
samples, where we aren't going to learn anything
since we've done it repeatedly. Who is this being
done for then, this routine type work? Well,
Bureau of Land Management is one of them. USGS.
Police departments. Whole lot of people. We've
got an analytical services laboratory. This is
fine. But it ought to really be backing up research
activities in the university much more than some
of these others. Now, that's one man's view,
obviously. But it's one I've thought about a good
deal. Well, I wanted to ask you to evaluate the role
of academic programs today in sciences. And you
partially already answered this. Do you think
they're becoming too specifically oriented
towards practical research or applied sciences
rather than theoretical research or theoretical
sciences? Well, there has to be a happy balance in
instruction as opposed to the research aspects of
instruction. There has to be a happy balance
between the theoretical and the applied and
practical. Because we do have to think of our
students and what they face. They've got to have
enough experience in practical matters to aid
them if that is the kind of job open to them. Today,
not all of them can go into the academic world.
There's no doubt of that. And so we have to have
that. This is a distinct question from the other
one of the role of the practical in terms of the use
of your facility.
Should a $300,000 piece of equipment, analytical
equipment be used to solve the needs of routine
water analysis for petroleum hydrocarbons, or
should it be used for the research activities
which are exploring much more than just whether
the compound is there and in what quantity, but
what it is actually doing by being there. These are
two entirely different approaches to the same
compound. And I think the university ought to be
working on the latter.
In your career, what has been your more favorite, I
should think? That's very poorly put. Or what type
of research would you say you enjoyed the more,
deep ocean research or deep sea research? I've had
two things that have been extremely attractive to
me, both of which through probably poor personal
discipline, have led into very difficult
problems
for which I may not be fully prepared. But both are
still admirably intriguing and soul satisfying.
The deep sea is very difficult to study. But it is,
it's been one of the thrilling experiences of my
life to work that way and to have been with students
during these cruises when, you know, we all shared
the same excitement.
But also this work in shallower water on these rock
reefs, I still feel I've been letting it mellow now
for some time, but it's all I still feel that these
extremely complex populations on these
submarine rock reefs are going to yield insights
into ecology that we have not yet codified. And I'm
just hoping that I can maintain my mental
faculties long enough to have sufficient time to
really go somewhere where you can get away from
this and really think about it. You know, it's sort
of like,
well, daily distractions are nowhere to
enter the plan for thoughtful work. You know, you
come to a point where you can no longer just grind it
out on a computer. You've got to think about it. And
that's where I am with some of this. I can just about
see that it's there, but I can't get it. And I don't
know what it's going to take associating with
other people. Maybe this symposium, you know.
There'll be enough stimulation of people coming
all together in a couple of gold sessions. You
might just hit on what you want. I know there's
something I want there. But David C. had the same
problem when he wanted to write the sea. He said, I
had to get away from the sea. I went way inland to do
it, because you can't. The sea is an overwhelming
experience. It comes back to that emotionality
and identification I talked about. How would you
explain your interest in the crustacea that you
specialize in and the systematics there? How does
that fit in? This was something that I wanted to do.
that I'd never done, is describe a new species. I
wanted the experience of doing this. And I'd
always been intrigued by this since studying in
that history of science course Carl Linnaeus, or
Carolus Linnaeus, you know, who was the starter of
modern systematics. I'd always wanted the
experience. This was a group no one was working on.
I couldn't get anybody to identify them. Was it
from a practical need that you needed... Yeah, and
so I said, this group, and they intrigued me, these
little rascals, too. They seem to have beautiful
isopathic limits. That is, they are restricted
depth-wise. And so, and since we were getting a
lot, we were getting things that a lot of deep-sea
biologists with this equipment and this monster
trawl, I was getting stuff people just hadn't seen
before. Now, Robert Menzies is... is an eminent
deep-sea biologist, but when he came over here and
looked at some of our collection, he'd never seen
some of these things because the Menzies trawl he
was working with just didn't get him. Well, that's
nothing against Menzies, but it just turns out
that he didn't know. Now, one of my former
students, Gil Rowe at Woods Hole, he goes down in
the deep submersible and takes a look at him with
his eyes. But I've still got organisms I've
collected, and big ones. I have never been able to
photograph them. Every other major group of
animals